I want to talk about what's happened
over the past 24 hours presidential
historian David Doug Brinkley said
describe the president's confused middle
State yeah I saw the transcripts from
just the the rambling talking about
Andrew Jackson in the Civil War we've
seen him try to bluff his way through
things before but you take that and John
Dickerson it was really really shocking
it with Dickerson he was mumbling he's
rambling around incoherent that will
show it um and then just sort of quit
talking walked off that we have it do we
have the Dickerson eye blind up so while
we're getting that Jon Meacham we of
course can ask you the easy question
about Andrew Jackson obviously he was
wrong about Andrew Jackson in the Civil
War by a matter of about 15 years I want
to ask you the more difficult question
do you follow Douglas Brinkley in your
assessment that the president the United
States certainly over the past 48 hours
has appeared to have a quote confused
mental state more so even than before
yeah I think you're right reading the
transcripts is always fascinating
because you do get inside the brain and
you begin to see how much bluffing does
go on the image that came to my mind was
less about confusion and more about it
felt more like a pinball machine or an
arcade you know he's just he's just the
steel ball that hits something the bells
go off and then he bounces off and hits
something else and that's not the most
reassuring image you want in a nuclear
age at the highest levels what was the
line from the Civil War why didn't any
but nobody's asked this question but I
didn't any why didn't anyone work that
one out yeah baby and he started but
nobody has asked this question before
but why did we even have a civil war I
my mother's had dementia for ten years
that sounds like the sort of thing my
mother would say today like people she
would say people don't ask that question
why did we have a civil war that's it's
beyond the realm that is something and
I'm not trying to be anything here but
very direct that's something that a
five-year-old might ask but that is not
anything that any grown-up that I have
ever been around in my entire life would
ever let pass from their lips because
that has been the central question of
how did America begin with slavery as
our original sin you know and how did we
move past that original sin in part
through the Civil War Mike this is and
I've got a John Dickerson clip coming up
next that's equally disturbing well look
what the question the question is one of
the single most posed questions in the
life of this country in American history
Jon Meacham just referred to reading the
transcripts which is an incredible
experience to read them as fascinating I
would also add disturbing they're very
disturbing to read the employment of
language for a president is one of the
most vital aspects of the presidency and
if you have a certain age with a certain
attention span and I would measure it
maybe at people at the age of over 45
who aren't walking around looking at
their phones you're used to a president
using language to move things right to
point things out a point emphasized the
importance of things strategically and
it's very upsetting kind of depressing
to read the transcripts of this
particular president as he rambles on
anecdotally ad libs about things that
are critical to the future of this kind
and doesn't know and myka this is not
this is not about Donald Trump being
ignorant is not about Donald Trump not
reading books this is not about Donald
Trump not knowing the issues we have
known that in the past and Alex just get
lined up for us if you will Donald Trump
on The Today Show back in the nineteen
ladies we're going to show you Donald
Trump now Donald Trump spoke back in the
80s and how he spoke when we knew him
for most of the ten years that we've
known him but mica your impression as we
were coming back and seeing a flood of
all these stories in the transcripts
what was your well I think we we talked
about this yesterday and I think it's
worth bringing up on the show it's it's
a it's it's disturbing and it's not just
what you're talking about in the
potential that you're bringing up but I
tweeted stop talking when I'm what's
really concerning me is that there is no
one absolutely no one in the White House
who can get him to stop talking there's
nobody everyone says Oh certain people
can get to him and there the secret
weapon there's no secret weapon he's
blithering right and left and I can only
imagine that his staff is sitting there
with their head in their hands he said
he'd no one can stop him he said he'd be
honored yesterday to meet with a
dictator who is is one of the most
heinous tyrants on the face of the earth
they had to flip-flop that he's not
listening to anyone well I just he
doesn't seem to remember what he said
just five minutes ago he doesn't know
his own positions on a health care bill
that he's passing he he seems confused
this was this was the president the
United States yesterday with John
Dickerson
it just it's baffling CLEP I don't get
it did President Obama give you any
advice that was helpful that you think
well he really was very nice to me but
after that we've had some difficulties
so it doesn't matter you know words are
less important to me than deeds and you
saw what happened with surveillance and
everybody saw what happened with
surveillance all t-town i thought that
well you saw what happened with
surveillance and I think that was
inappropriate what does that mean sir
you can figure that out you say like the
reason I asked as you said he called him
sick and bad
look you can figure it out yourself he
was very nice to me with words but and
when I was with him but after that there
has been no relationship but you stand
by that claim about I'm stand by
anything I just you can take it the way
you want
I think our sides been proven very
strongly and everybody's talking about
it and frankly it should be discussed I
think that is a very big surveillance of
our citizens I think that's a very big
topic and it's a topic that should be
number one and we should find out what
the hell is going on I just wanted to
find out though you're the other
president United States you said he was
sick and bad because he kept young
anyway you can take it any way you want
but I'm asking you because you don't
want to do fake news I want to hear the
president is wrong you don't have to ask
why not because I have my own opinions
you can have your own opinions but I
want to know your opinions you're the
president of United States it's enough
thank you thank you very much Mark
Helprin I think the thing with North
Korea is the most serious because by
saying he would want to be honored
expressing respect and honor and saying
he'd meet with him one-on-one what has
he said tried to walk that back but in
the context of all these other things
that you've talked about that he said
that is so unsettling to Japan to South
Korea and Mike said it presidential
words matter and speak to speak over a
course of a range of interviews over
about a week with such imprecision about
history and about his position on health
care and then to float the notion of
being honored to meet the head of set
North Korea this is where the
imprecision and behaving away his
behavior has real-world impact and Eddie
he said not so long ago that we could be
heading to a major major war with North
Korea right I mean and now he's honored
to me again it's as if he doesn't
remember what he said five minutes ago I
didn't you know it's really interesting
on the one hand we've seen this with
regards to his embrace put on quote of
Putin the call to Ottawa and Turkey
now the gesture to the North Korea and
also the Philippines with New York T
right there's a sense in which there's
this a
Chintu strongmen so there's that element
of it and then there's a sense the clip
about the kind of reaction of a petulant
child
in that moment instead of owning
responsibility for what he did right
there's a kind of displacement and then
the reaction to go just I'm done and go
sit down it is at a desk where nothing I
do I don't stand by anything and then
there is his quote I don't and by
anything and in the third point though
is that he seems to make not knowing a
good that is to say there is a sense in
which his whether the comments around
Andrew Jackson not knowing just
ignorance a good yeah and it seems to
justify people who are is base not
really wanting to be informed right and
that seems to me deeply problematic for
democracy it's alright so let's go to
the Andrew Jackson clip we do have the
North Korea on which I want to replay
again we did play in the open but it is
worth looking at but first this is
Donald Trump rewriting history at the
very least take a look
I mean had Andrew Jackson been a little
bit later you wouldn't have had the
Civil War he was he was a very tough
person but he had a big heart and he was
he was really angry that he saw what was
happening with regard to the Civil War
ease and there's no reason for this
people don't ask that question but why
was there the Civil War why could why
could that one not have been worked out
people don't ask that question Jon
Meacham go because well what he's done
and and this goes all we're talking
about is he's taking two unrelated
things largely unrelated things and sort
of smashing them together like a couple
of blocks one is this newfound interest
in Andrew Jackson which largely comes
from Steve Bannon I spent about an hour
hour and a half with him in May of 16
talking about presidents he admired and
Jackson never came up
Steve Bannon put this in the
conversation after the victory saying
this was a Jacksonian moment I think the
president the president was down here at
Nash
Oh later to wreath at the tomb sort of
associated himself with a populace who
have you ever had a student you ever had
a person at a book event and I'm serious
have you ever had an adult say to you
people don't ask the question about why
we had a civil war I know are like why
did we have to have that Civil War thing
it's no it only comes up and you know
these folks - it comes up in neo
Confederate circles right people who
argue oh it was states rights it wasn't
slavery which is completely wrong
there's no there's a whole level of
scholarship Myka get ready I was just
about to say land this plane now exactly
but there's a there's an interesting set
of questions about could the war have
been delayed
Lincoln was willing to allow slavery to
exist but not expand but that's not what
President Trump was was talking about he
was not worried about the Crittenden
Compromise of the winter of 1860 61 what
he what is happening I think is these
different dots get connected often
wrongly in his head and why wait just a
curiosity eye photos back to you all
what why would we expect anything
different I mean he built his career he
built his temporal success right not
just making stuff up know what it's done
well we would expect something different
because these the president united stand
States and he's surrounded himself with
one of the strongest foreign policy
teams we've maybe seen in decades over
the weekend President Trump called the
dictator of North Korea a smart cookie
to talk to you or what use of words Mike
I mean I do expect more do you have I do
expect you have the Today Show clips
from the 80s find those if you will and
you'll see that we're not talking about
you know whether we swap is a huckster
or not you know we're talking about how
mentally there is a marked change in
this man even in the past five years
nowhere you setting us up we a sense
part of this is going and professor
Meacham would be
valuable addition in terms of carrying
on this conversation is this all of us
who are parents of children and our
parents before us you'd put your child
on a school bus at the age of six or
seven that go to school you would have
an expectation when history is being
taught American history in schools and
we no longer teach American history as
well as we ought to but the combination
of myth and memory surrounding the
office of the president it will be
taught to children George Washington
Abraham Lincoln that is slowly being
chewed away by the language employed by
this particular president and the way he
uses that way I don't lift up the prime
worried he doesn't understand but he
doesn't it seems that he doesn't
understand the office itself the primer
that's invited but we could ask if
Morris just just for everybody that out
there that's asking why this discussion
why now because it gravedas because it
has gotten considerably worse even over
I think the past is Douglas Brinkley
said over the past 24 48 hours have been
some of the most confounding confusing
it seems to be among the most bizarre
recent 24 hours in American presidential
history it was all just surreal disarray
in a confused mental state from the
president and I had asked twice what was
going on with his mind before I read
this from from Doug Brantley race we
have we followed Donald Trump the last
24 hours have been far different even
from what we saw last year I got all the
examples we've talked about I think are
legit to talk about but I'm really
mostly focused on North Korea right I
know but I'm just talking about are you
we understand I think that's the most
serious thing I'm asking you generally
though does the president do you agree
with Douglas Brinkley that that perhaps
the past 24 hours have been perhaps
Donald Trump at his most confused
well I bound go so far as to diagnose
him as Brinkley seems to do from afar
but but but there's no doubt that this
in
it's more than 24-hour with the
associate center what about the resort
what about the the yeah okay the last
week is bizarre then we'll attach
bizarre has this been the most bizarre
week yes and and it's and it's in a
period when blood not just the end of
the symbolic ends of the hundred days
but when he's dealing with the North
Korean nuclear situation with the
healthcare tens of millions of Americans
that example which we haven't really
talked about not understanding about the
question of what's in the House bill
that level of confusion I explained how
he didn't know what was something else I
mean did that there's some debate The
Wall Street Journal editorial page tries
to bail him out a little bit but there's
no doubt that people with pre-existing
conditions will be in al any worse off
shape in some parts of the country at
least if the House bill ever became law
and he's going around saying no affect
people with pre-existing conditions will
still be protected
I'm all for talking about the broad
sweep of the last week but what I'm
saying what I'm saying is for North
Korea for people worried about their
health care this lack of clarity the
sloppy talk has real implications but
you're it's almost like you're
pinpointing those two topics like let's
analyze what he said about those and be
concerned on a policy level and have a
converse we're gonna say what maybe no
one said we'll do it again I'm not sure
he's okay well I mean looked I think
there's a cut I'm not sure he's okay you
have that feeling with people right who
are not okay where it starts to dawn on
you but they are not as getting worse
that it's getting worse and and it's a
much bigger issue worse than it has been
and you talked about the AP interview
and these other interviews the president
the United States saying gee this is a
lot harder mm-hmm then my last job was
there's not a human being on the face of
the earth that wouldn't understand that
you were stepping to the most difficult
job of your life just look at pictures
of presidents walking in and walking out
of the White House and then he said gee
this is really hard every day is really
hard I thought it was going to be easier
I thought it was going to be easier than
this and I think the accumulative effect
of the last hundred days we're beginning
to see it I think it's important I want
to echo not Mark's point it's I think to
move from the
consequences of this instability what
what does it portend for the nation for
the world I think it's important to
emphasize that with regards to Andrew
Jackson we can talk about the Frederick
Douglass comment we could talk about
he's you know the susan b anthony
comment with regard you know in terms in
front of women he hasn't he doesn't he
hasn't demonstrated a whole on history
over the course of the hundred days we
could talk about the flip-flopping the
policies with regards to NAFTA we can go
down down the line health care right you
know 200 line all right wait NAFTA is
another great example where he says it
basically tells everybody I'm going to
get rid of NAFTA in the morning and then
his advisers show him a map they'd say
well these are the states would be hurt
if you get rid of NAFTA he goes okay I
won't get rid of NAFTA in the same day
this is a pinball effect it's beyond
bizarre and myka I want to end this
where you began it there is nobody in
the White House that is capable of
stopping him from doing serious damage
by the day to American alliances and to
American treaties and to America's
standing across the globe and yes this
man has been erratic from day one but it
has gotten worse he has as Douglas
Brinkley said a confused middle state
that has gotten worse and we will show
you when we come back exactly how much
worse it has gotten over the years but
that is a problem
every day another radical flip-flop that
shows things are not well inside the
White House and there's nobody that can
step up and stop this thanks for
checking out MSNBC on YouTube and make
sure you subscribe to stay up-to-date on
the day's biggest stories and you can
click on any of the videos around us to
watch more 4 Morning Joe and MSNBC
thanks so much for watching